Christopher Patton
University of California, Davis
Computer Science
ECS 240 - Karl Levitt
May 2012

This code comprises an interpreter for the toy programming language called
Pelican, specified formally in the book "Formal Syntax and Semantics of 
Programming Languages" by Addison and Wesley. It parses the language from a 
formal grammar (in BNF) and verifies it through via  denotational 
semantics. 

Pelican is a superset of a simpler language called Wren that adds syntax and 
semantics for procedures and scopes. In this implementation, Pelican is 
extended to include the continuation semantics (gotos) of Gull. 

Here and in the code, I attempt to document exhaustively which features of 
Pelican I have left unimplemented, as well as implementation-specific nuances
and potential sources of bugs.


FILES
-----
main.sml  . . . . . . . top level of the interpreter
semantics.sml . . . . . signature specifying semantic domains/equations and 
                        auxillary functions
interpreter.sml . . . . structure implementing SEMANTICS
syntax.sml  . . . . . . signature specifying the the parser
parser.sml  . . . . . . implements SYNTAX
grammar.sml . . . . . . the BNF for Pelican
common.sml  . . . . . . functions used all over the place
token.c . . . . . . . . the "tokenizer" splits all the tokens in a Pelican 
                        program on their own line
example/  . . . . . . . directory with some sample Pelican code


COMPILING and RUNNING 
---------------------
Except for the tokenizer (token.c), the interpreter is written in Standard 
ML and compiled with SML/NJ. To compile, typing

 $ sml main.sml

will compile a "heap image" for your computers' architecturce, which is 
combined with the SML/NJ runtime environment to run the program. Next, do

 $ gcc -o token token.c
 $ ./pelican foo.w

to tokenize, parse, and run the program foo. The directory contains the code 
as well as some sample programs with the suffix .w (for "Wren"). 


SOME SYNTACTIC DIFFERENCES 
--------------------------
Note that this interpreter has some syntactic differences form the formal 
definition found in Addison/Wesley. In particular, functions may have an
arbitrary number of arguments, and their invokation must be followed by 
paranthesis (ie. foo(), bar(b, 23, false), etc). Also, block declarations 
are formally a list of identifiers and denotable domains. Each variable
or procedure declaration must be followed by a semicolon. For example, 

program guy is
    var a : integer;
    var b : integer;
    procedure dude () is begin
        a := 2; 
    end; 
begin 
       ... 
end 

Similarily, the series of commands in a block must all be followed by 
semicolons, except for while-do, if-then, and if-then-else statements:

program guy is 
       ...
begin
    a := -1; 
    if a < 0 then
        guy() 
    else 
        a := a + b; 
    end if
    bar(a, -4, true);
end

Lastly, the keyword "write" takes a single variable as an 
argument (as opposed to an integer or boolean expression). 
The reason for this is purely laziness. It wouldn't take
much to generalize this.

Currently, read and write only work on integer values.


MISSING FEATURES
----------------
There are two features pertaining to Pelican that I neglected to implement:
nested declare-blocks, as in

 program foo is 
  ... 
 begin 
  ... 
    declare 
        var flag : boolean;
    begin 
     ...
    end
 end

and constants, as in

 program foo is 
    const a = 5; 
 begin ... 

The declare block would be quite simple. I'd represent it as a command 
syntactically and run 'perform' when it is executed. In denotational semantics:
execute [[ DeclareBlock(block) ]] env, sto = perform [[ block ]] env, sto. 
I've already completed the semantics for constants; I just haven't implemented 
them syntactically. See the semantic domain in semantics.sml.


CONTINUATION SEMANTICS
----------------------
Gotos/labels function a bit differently in my implementation than in the book.
Syntactically, a label in a program is a command comprised of the label name
and the rest of the program. This definition is recursive, in that a label 
can be a command in the "rest of the program" associated with a label. For
example,

 one: skip; 
 two: 
      end

will be parsed as [(Label("one", [Skip, Label("two",[])])] in ML. In the 
semantic world, when declaring the environment while performing a block, the
interpreter will look ahead for the labels in the block, descending 
recursively. This causes problems when a goto to label outside the local 
block is executed; the goto will begin execution at the new label to the 
end of the program, then it will continue executing from the place it was 
called in the function. See "examples/gull_bug.w" to see this in action. 

Given time, I would change gotos/labels syntactically to not be recursive. 
Instead, a parsed block will contain a list of Labels and their corresponding
"rest of programs". I would parse the above code snippet as:

 [Label("one", [Skip]), Label("two")]

I believe this would eliminate this bug.  


TODO
----

Syntax
 * const 
 * Better error handling. For now, it just says "Syntax Error!"
 * improve efficiency. See parser.sml:4
 * write IntExpr/BoolExpr
 * VariableList

Semantics
 * const (elaborate function)
 * It would be cool to have a return statement for functions. 

Other
 * Can only input positive integers! See getInt() in common.sml
 * allow comments, modify token.c
 * rewrite the tokenizer in ML (replace token.c)?
 * print strings

Bugs
 * labels: don't allow labels to be renamed (see interpreter.sml:114)
 * routines: local variables dangle in store. See interpreter.sml:228 
 * I don't like that funciton declarations must be followed by semicolon. 
 * parser.sml: change isVar to isIdentifier überall
